I recently had a great conversation with James Özden on his How I Learned to Love Shrimp podcast. I want to expand here on our exchange about the likely effects of plant-based defaults. I (predictably) expressed skepticism that small changes, in general, lead to large effects.

James: I think Lewis [Bollard] in [the] podcast we had with him said, you know, his default for most interventions is they don't work. And when they work, this is a pleasant surprise. But I think for most people, this is not the case. But it seems like you're more in the case of, uh, things don't really work until proven otherwise, or you expect things to be small changes just because it's hard to change the world….it's easy to for people who want the world to change in a certain way, when they see these things promising big results for small changes, we want to believe them because it's like this could really help animals or really improve the world. But sadly, I think reality is often this is highly overstated.

My take: I don’t think this is sad. I’m grateful that behavior is stubborn, because if it weren’t, any super-effective, low-cost, pro-social intervention could be turned on its head to produce effects we don’t like.

This is true across domains. Example: Little Mosque on the Prairie is a Canadian sitcom about a guy who leaves his big city lawyer job to become an Imam in a small town in Saskatchewan. It received laudatory advanced coverage in the New York Times, BBC, and NPR, with the Times noting that “one goal of the show is to explain Muslim behavior, or at least make Muslims seem less peculiar, much as humor about Jews, Italians or gays helped those groups assimilate.”

Murrar and Brauer (2018) tested whether watching Little Mosque can durably reduce prejudice by having “White individuals ranging from 18 to 60 years of age…in a mid-sized Midwestern city" watch either six episodes of Little Mosque or six episodes of Friends, which, as they artfully put it, “exclusively depicts White characters going about their daily lives." The paper finds that subjects who watched Little Mosque report more pro-Muslim attitudes than control subjects, and the authors call this “strong evidence for the effectiveness of entertainment-education at reducing prejudice." The positive effects persist four weeks later.

This is a great example of what Paluck et al. (2021) call a “light touch intervention:” “easy to implement, brief…inexpensive, and thought to have lasting effects.” I get why this seems like good news. But gosh do I hope these results are a false positive, because when I read this study, I wonder: if people are this malleable, what happens if they watch Homeland, or, heaven forbid, 24? I don’t see any way in which malleability only works in the direction we want it to. Any light-touch thing you like can be turned on its head. If making more plant-based options available on the menu radically reduced meat consumption, then putting more meat options on the menu would likely do the opposite.

This is important to my worldview so I figured I should articulate it more definitively.
